Software installation
=====================

This page contains instructions for installing the required software
on your computer.  The workshop could be done with a remote Jupyter
server, as long as you can use the terminal from the Jupyter (you need
to be able to access the command line sometime).



Python
------

We expect you to have a working Python installation with some common
libraries.  We recommend that you install the `Anaconda python
distribution <https://docs.continuum.io/anaconda/install/>`__.  For
more information on installing anaconda, you can see `the CodeRefinery
instructions <https://coderefinery.github.io/installation/python/>`__.

Any other Python distribution which you can install libraries into
would work, but because there are so many different ways to do this,
we don't support them.



Verify the installation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After activating the conda environment, you should be able to check
the Python version from the command line.  Any version of python3
should work:

.. code-block:: console

   $ python3 -V
   Python 3.8.3


You should be able to start Jupyter:

.. code-block:: console

   $ jupyter lab
   (... Jupyter starts in a web browser)


For one lesson, it is good to have ``git`` installed:

.. code-block:: console

   $ git --version
   git version 2.17.1


Text editor
-----------

For one portion of the course, you will need a text editor.  See the
`CodeRefinery instructions
<https://coderefinery.github.io/installation/editors/>`__.  You don't
exactly need a terminal editor - the graphical ones, such as VSCode or
whatever you use now, will work as well.


Shell
-----

TODO.  You can see the `CodeRefinery instructions
<https://coderefinery.github.io/installation/bash/>`__.


git
---

On the very last day, we use git.  See the `CodeRefinery instructions
<https://coderefinery.github.io/installation/git/>`__.


Zoom
----

If this is an online workshop, it might use zoom.  You can see
`CodeRefinery instructions for it
<https://coderefinery.github.io/installation/zoom/>`__.
