# Plotting with [Vega-Altair](https://altair-viz.github.io/)

:::{objectives}
- Be able to create simple plots with Vega-Altair and tweak them
- Know how to look for help
- Reading data with Pandas from disk or a web resource
- Know how to tweak example plots from a gallery for your own purpose
- We will build up
  [this notebook](https://nbviewer.org/github/AaltoSciComp/python-for-scicomp/blob/master/resources/notebooks/plotting.ipynb)
  (spoiler alert!)
:::

:::{instructor-note}
- 10 min: Introduction
- 10 min: Type-along (creating a first plot)
- 20 min: Exercise (using visual channels)
- 20 min: Exercise (adapting a gallery example and customizing)
- 10 min: Key points, discussion, and Q&A
:::


## Repeatability/reproducibility

From [Claus O. Wilke: "Fundamentals of Data Visualization"](https://clauswilke.com/dataviz/):

> *One thing I have learned over the years is that automation is your friend. I
> think figures should be autogenerated as part of the data analysis pipeline
> (which should also be automated), and they should come out of the pipeline
> ready to be sent to the printer, no manual post-processing needed.*

- **Try to minimize manual post-processing**. This could bite you when you need to regenerate 50
  figures one day before submission deadline or regenerate a set of figures
  after the person who created them left the group.
- There is not the one perfect language and **not the one perfect library** for everything.
- Within Python, many libraries exist:
  - [Vega-Altair](https://altair-viz.github.io/gallery/index.html):
    declarative visualization, statistics built in
  - [Matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/stable/gallery/index.html):
    probably the most standard and most widely used
  - [Seaborn](https://seaborn.pydata.org/examples/index.html):
    high-level interface to Matplotlib, statistical functions built in
  - [Plotly](https://plotly.com/python/):
    interactive graphs
  - [Bokeh](https://demo.bokeh.org/):
    also here good for interactivity
  - [plotnine](https://plotnine.readthedocs.io/):
    implementation of a grammar of graphics in Python, it is based on [ggplot2](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/)
  - [ggplot](https://yhat.github.io/ggpy/):
    R users will be more at home
  - [PyNGL](https://www.pyngl.ucar.edu/Examples/gallery.shtml):
    used in the weather forecast community
  - [K3D](https://k3d-jupyter.org/gallery/index.html):
    Jupyter Notebook extension for 3D visualization
  - ...
- Two main families of libraries: procedural (e.g. Matplotlib) and declarative (e.g. Vega-Altair).


## Why are we starting with [Vega-Altair](https://altair-viz.github.io/)?

- Concise and powerful
- "Simple, friendly and consistent API" allows us to focus on the data
  visualization part and get started without too much Python knowledge
- The way it **combines visual channels with data columns** can feel intuitive
- Interfaces very nicely with [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) ({ref}`earlier episode <pandas>`)
- Easy to change figures
- Good documentation
- Open source
- Makes it easy to save figures in a number of formats (svg, png, html)
- Easy to save interactive visualizations to be used in websites


## Example data: Weather data from two Norwegian cities

We will experiment with some example weather data obtained from [Norsk
KlimaServiceSenter](https://seklima.met.no/observations/), Meteorologisk
institutt (MET) (CC BY 4.0).  The data is in CSV format (comma-separated
values) and contains daily and monthly weather data for two cities in Norway:
Oslo and Tromsø. You can browse the data
[here in the lesson repository](https://github.com/AaltoSciComp/python-for-scicomp/tree/master/resources/data/plotting).

We will use the Pandas library to read the data into a dataframe. We have learned about Pandas in an {ref}`earlier episode <pandas>`.

Pandas can read from and write to a large set of formats
([overview of input/output functions and formats](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/io.html)).
We will load a CSV file directly from the web. Instead of using a web URL we
could use a local file name instead.

Pandas dataframes are a great data structure for **tabular data** and tabular
data turns out to be a great input format for data visualization libraries.
Vega-Altair understands Pandas dataframes and can plot them directly.


## Reading data into a dataframe

We can try this together in a notebook:
Using Pandas we can **merge, join, concatenate, and compare**
dataframes, see <https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/user_guide/merging.html>.

Let us try to **concatenate** two dataframes: one for Tromsø weather data (we
will now load monthly values) and one for Oslo:
```{code-block} python
---
emphasize-lines: 8
---
import pandas as pd

url_prefix = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AaltoSciComp/python-for-scicomp/master/resources/data/plotting/"

data_tromso = pd.read_csv(url_prefix + "tromso-monthly.csv")
data_oslo = pd.read_csv(url_prefix + "oslo-monthly.csv")

data_monthly = pd.concat([data_tromso, data_oslo], axis=0)

# let us print the combined result
data_monthly
```

Before plotting the data, there is a problem which we may not see yet: Dates
are not in a standard date format (YYYY-MM-DD). We can fix this:
```python
# replace mm.yyyy to date format
data_monthly["date"] = pd.to_datetime(list(data_monthly["date"]), format="%m.%Y")
```

With Pandas it is possible to do a lot more (adjusting missing values, fixing
inconsistencies, changing format).


## Plotting the data

Now let's plot the data. We will start with a plot that is not optimal and
then we will explore and improve a bit as we go:

```python
import altair as alt

alt.Chart(data_monthly).mark_bar().encode(
    x="date",
    y="precipitation",
    color="name",
)
```

:::{figure} plotting-vega-altair/precipitation-on-top.svg
:alt: Monthly precipitation for the cities Oslo and Tromsø over the course of a year.

Monthly precipitation for the cities Oslo and Tromsø over the course of a year.
:::

:::{discussion} Let us pause and explain the code
- `alt` is a short-hand for `altair` which we imported on top of the notebook
- `Chart()` is a function defined inside `altair` which takes the data as argument
- `mark_bar()` is a function that produces bar charts
- `encode()` is a function which encodes data columns to **visual channels**

Observe how we connect (encode) **visual channels** to data columns:
- x-coordinate with "date"
- y-coordinate with "precipitation"
- color with "name" (name of weather station; city)
:::

We can improve the plot by giving Vega-Altair a bit more information that the
x-axis is **temporal** (T) and that we would like to see the year and
month (yearmonth):
```{code-block} python
---
emphasize-lines: 2
---
alt.Chart(data_monthly).mark_bar().encode(
    x="yearmonth(date):T",
    y="precipitation",
    color="name",
)
```

Apart from T (temporal), there are other
[encoding data types](https://altair-viz.github.io/user_guide/encodings/index.html#encoding-data-types):
- Q (quantitative)
- O (ordinal)
- N (nominal)
- T (temporal)
- G (geojson)

:::{figure} plotting-vega-altair/precipitation-on-top-yearmonth.svg
:alt: Monthly precipitation for the cities Oslo and Tromsø over the course of a year.

Monthly precipitation for the cities Oslo and Tromsø over the course of a year.
:::

Let us improve the plot with another one-line change:
```{code-block} python
---
emphasize-lines: 5
---
alt.Chart(data_monthly).mark_bar().encode(
    x="yearmonth(date):T",
    y="precipitation",
    color="name",
    column="name",
)
```

:::{figure} plotting-vega-altair/precipitation-side.svg
:alt: Monthly precipitation for the cities Oslo and Tromsø over the course of a year with with both cities plotted side by side.

Monthly precipitation for the cities Oslo and Tromsø over the course of a year with with both cities plotted side by side.
:::

With another one-line change we can make the bar chart stacked:
```{code-block} python
---
emphasize-lines: 5
---
alt.Chart(data_monthly).mark_bar().encode(
    x="yearmonth(date):T",
    y="precipitation",
    color="name",
    xOffset="name",
)
```
:::{figure} plotting-vega-altair/precipitation-stacked-x.svg
:alt: Monthly precipitation for the cities Oslo and Tromsø over the course of a year with with both cities plotted side by side.

Monthly precipitation for the cities Oslo and Tromsø over the course of a year
plotted as stacked bar chart.
:::

This is not publication-quality yet but a really good start!

Let us try one more example where we can nicely see how Vega-Altair
is able to map visual channels to data columns:
```python
alt.Chart(data_monthly).mark_area(opacity=0.5).encode(
    x="yearmonth(date):T",
    y="max temperature",
    y2="min temperature",
    color="name",
)
```

:::{figure} plotting-vega-altair/temperature-ranges-combined.svg
:alt: Monthly temperature ranges for two cities in Norway.

Monthly temperature ranges for two cities in Norway.
:::

:::{discussion} What other marks and other visual channels exist?
- [Overview of available marks](https://altair-viz.github.io/user_guide/marks/index.html)
- [Overview of available visual channels](https://altair-viz.github.io/user_guide/encodings/channels.html)
- [Gallery of examples](https://altair-viz.github.io/gallery/index.html)
:::


## Exercise: Using visual channels to re-arrange plots

::::{exercise} Plotting-1: Using visual channels to re-arrange plots
1. Try to reproduce the above plots if they are not already in your notebook.

1. Above we have plotted the monthly precipitation for two cities side by side
   using a stacked plot. Try to arrive at the following plot where months are
   along the y-axis and the precipitation amount is along the x-axis:
   :::{figure} plotting-vega-altair/precipitation-stacked-y.svg
   :::

1. Ask the Internet or AI how to change the axis title from "precipitation"
   to "Precipitation (mm)".

1. Modify the temperature range plot to show the temperature ranges for the
   two cities side by side like this:
   :::{figure} plotting-vega-altair/temperature-ranges-side.svg
   :::

:::{solution}
1. Copy-paste code blocks from above.

1. Basically we switched x and y:
   ```{code-block} python
   ---
   emphasize-lines: 2,3,5
   ---
   alt.Chart(data_monthly).mark_bar().encode(
       y="yearmonth(date):T",
       x="precipitation",
       color="name",
       yOffset="name",
   )
   ```

1. This can be done with the following modification:
   ```{code-block} python
   ---
   emphasize-lines: 3
   ---
   alt.Chart(data_monthly).mark_bar().encode(
       y="yearmonth(date):T",
       x=alt.X("precipitation").title("Precipitation (mm)"),
       color="name",
       yOffset="name",
   )
   ```

1. We added one line:
   ```{code-block} python
   ---
   emphasize-lines: 6
   ---
   alt.Chart(data_monthly).mark_area(opacity=0.5).encode(
       x="yearmonth(date):T",
       y="max temperature",
       y2="min temperature",
       color="name",
       column="name",
   )
   ```
:::
::::


## More fun with visual channels

Now we will try to **plot the daily data and look at snow depths**. We first
read and concatenate two datasets:
```python
url_prefix = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AaltoSciComp/python-for-scicomp/master/resources/data/plotting/"

data_tromso = pd.read_csv(url_prefix + "tromso-daily.csv")
data_oslo = pd.read_csv(url_prefix + "oslo-daily.csv")

data_daily = pd.concat([data_tromso, data_oslo], axis=0)
```

We adjust the data a bit:
```python
# replace dd.mm.yyyy to date format
data_daily["date"] = pd.to_datetime(list(data_daily["date"]), format="%d.%m.%Y")

# we are here only interested in the range december to may
data_daily = data_daily[
    (data_daily["date"] > "2022-12-01") & (data_daily["date"] < "2023-05-01")
]
```

Now we can plot the snow depths for the months December to May for the two
cities:
```python
alt.Chart(data_daily).mark_bar().encode(
    x="date",
    y="snow depth",
    column="name",
)
```

:::{figure} plotting-vega-altair/snow-depth.svg
:alt: Snow depth (in cm) for the months December 2022 to May 2023 for two cities in Norway.

Snow depth (in cm) for the months December 2022 to May 2023 for two cities in Norway.
:::

What happens if we try to color the plot by the "max temperature" values?
```{code-block} python
---
emphasize-lines: 4
---
alt.Chart(data_daily).mark_bar().encode(
    x="date",
    y="snow depth",
    color="max temperature",
    column="name",
)
```

The result looks neat:
:::{figure} plotting-vega-altair/snow-depth-color.svg
:alt: Snow depth (in cm) for the months December 2022 to May 2023 for two cities in Norway. Colored by daily max temperature.

Snow depth (in cm) for the months December 2022 to May 2023 for two cities in Norway. Colored by daily max temperature.
:::

We can change the color scheme ([available color schemes](https://vega.github.io/vega/docs/schemes/)):
```{code-block} python
---
emphasize-lines: 4
---
alt.Chart(data_daily).mark_bar().encode(
    x="date",
    y="snow depth",
    color=alt.Color("max temperature").scale(scheme="plasma"),
    column="name",
)
```

With the following result:
:::{figure} plotting-vega-altair/snow-depth-plasma.svg
:alt: Snow depth (in cm) for the months December 2022 to May 2023 for two cities in Norway. Colored by daily max temperature. Warmer days are often followed by reduced snow depth.

Snow depth (in cm) for the months December 2022 to May 2023 for two cities in Norway. Colored by daily max temperature. Warmer days are often followed by reduced snow depth.
:::

Let's try one more change to show that we can experiment with different
plot types by changing `mark_bar()` to something else, in this case `mark_circle()`:
```{code-block} python
---
emphasize-lines: 1
---
alt.Chart(data_daily).mark_circle().encode(
    x="date",
    y="snow depth",
    color=alt.Color("max temperature").scale(scheme="plasma"),
    column="name",
)
```

:::{figure} plotting-vega-altair/snow-depth-circles.svg
:alt: Snow depth (in cm) for the months December 2022 to May 2023 for two cities in Norway. Colored by daily max temperature. Warmer days are often followed by reduced snow depth.

Snow depth (in cm) for the months December 2022 to May 2023 for two cities in Norway. Colored by daily max temperature. Warmer days are often followed by reduced snow depth.
:::


## Themes

In [Vega-Altair](https://altair-viz.github.io/) you can change the theme and
select from a long [list of themes](https://github.com/vega/vega-themes).  On
top of your notebook try to add:
```python
alt.themes.enable('dark')
```
Then re-run all cells. Later you can try some other themes such as:
- `fivethirtyeight`
- `latimes`
- `urbaninstitute`

You can even define your own themes!


## Exercise: Adapting a gallery example

In this exercise we can try to adapt existing scripts to either **tweak how the
plot looks** or to **modify the input data**.  This is very close to real life:
there are so many options and possibilities and it is almost impossible to
remember everything so this strategy is useful to practice:
- Select an example that is close to what you have in mind
- Being able to adapt it to your needs
- Being able to search for help

::::{exercise} Plotting-2: Adapting a gallery example
**This is a great exercise which is very close to real life.**

- Browse the [Vega-Altair example gallery](https://altair-viz.github.io/gallery/index.html).
- Select one example that is close to your current/recent visualization project
  or simply interests you.
- First try to reproduce this example, as-is, in the Jupyter Notebook.
- **If you get the error "ModuleNotFoundError: No module named
  'vega_datasets'", then try one of these examples:** (they do not need the "vega_datasets" module)
  - [Slider cutoff](https://altair-viz.github.io/gallery/slider_cutoff.html)
    (**below you can find a walk-through for this example**)
  - [Multi-Line tooltip](https://altair-viz.github.io/gallery/multiline_tooltip_standard.html)
  - [Heatmap](https://altair-viz.github.io/gallery/simple_heatmap.html)
  - [Layered histogram](https://altair-viz.github.io/gallery/layered_histogram.html)
- Then try to print out the data that is used in this example just before the call of the plotting function
  to learn about its structure. Consider writing the data to file before changing it.
- Then try to modify the data a bit.
- If you have time, try to feed it different, simplified data.
  **This will be key for adapting the examples to your projects.**

:::{solution} Example walk-through for the slider cutoff example
In this walk-through I imagine browsing: <https://altair-viz.github.io/gallery/index.html>

Then this example caught my eye: <https://altair-viz.github.io/gallery/slider_cutoff.html>

I then copy-paste the example code into a notebook and try to run it and I get
the same result.

If you get stuck below, **you can also browse all the steps** in a [notebook
using
nbviewer](https://nbviewer.org/github/AaltoSciComp/python-for-scicomp/blob/master/resources/notebooks/plotting-exercise-2.ipynb).

Next, there is a lot of code that I don't (need to) understand yet but my eyes are trying to find
`alt.Chart` which tells me that the data must be the "df" in `alt.Chart(df)`:
```{code-block} python
---
emphasize-lines: 15
---
import altair as alt
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np

rand = np.random.RandomState(42)

df = pd.DataFrame({
    'xval': range(100),
    'yval': rand.randn(100).cumsum()
})

slider = alt.binding_range(min=0, max=100, step=1)
cutoff = alt.param(bind=slider, value=50)

alt.Chart(df).mark_point().encode(
    x='xval',
    y='yval',
    color=alt.condition(
        alt.datum.xval < cutoff,
        alt.value('red'), alt.value('blue')
    )
).add_params(
    cutoff
)
```

My next step will be to print out the data `df` just before the call to `alt.Chart`:
```{code-block} python
---
emphasize-lines: 15
---
import altair as alt
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np

rand = np.random.RandomState(42)

df = pd.DataFrame({
    'xval': range(100),
    'yval': rand.randn(100).cumsum()
})

slider = alt.binding_range(min=0, max=100, step=1)
cutoff = alt.param(bind=slider, value=50)

print(df)

alt.Chart(df).mark_point().encode(
    x='xval',
    y='yval',
    color=alt.condition(
        alt.datum.xval < cutoff,
        alt.value('red'), alt.value('blue')
    )
).add_params(
    cutoff
    )
```

The print reveals that `df` is a dataframe which contains x and y values:
```text
    xval       yval
0      0   0.496714
1      1   0.358450
2      2   1.006138
3      3   2.529168
4      4   2.295015
..   ...        ...
95    95 -10.712354
96    96 -10.416233
97    97 -10.155178
98    98 -10.150065
99    99 -10.384652

[100 rows x 2 columns]
```

The next thing that often helps me is to save the data to a comma-separated
values (CSV) file:
```python
import pandas as pd

df.to_csv("data.csv", index=False)
```

I then open the file in an editor and see that it contains 100 rows:
```text
xval,yval
0,0.4967141530112327
1,0.358449851840048
2,1.0061383899407406
3,2.5291682463487657
4,2.2950148716254297
5,2.060877914676249
6,3.6400907301836405
7,4.407525459336549
8,3.938051073401597
9,4.4806111169875615
...
```

Saving the data to file often helps me to see the structure of the data and now
I am in a position to replace this with my own data. I create a file called
"mydata.csv" and there I use the maximum temperatures for months 1-10 from the
Tromso monthly data which we used further up:
```text
xval,yval
01,7.7
02,6.6
03,4.5
04,9.8
05,17.7
06,25.4
07,26.7
08,25.1
09,19.3
10,9.8
```

In the notebook I then verify that the reading of the data works:
```python
mydata = pd.read_csv("mydata.csv")

mydata
```

Now I can replace the example with my own data (note how I now can comment out
some code that I don't need any longer):
```{code-block} python
---
emphasize-lines: 16
---
import altair as alt
import pandas as pd
# import numpy as np

# rand = np.random.RandomState(42)

# df = pd.DataFrame({
#     'xval': range(100),
#     'yval': rand.randn(100).cumsum()
# })

slider = alt.binding_range(min=0, max=100, step=1)
cutoff = alt.param(bind=slider, value=50)

# print(df)
df = pd.read_csv("mydata.csv")

alt.Chart(df).mark_point().encode(
    x='xval',
    y='yval',
    color=alt.condition(
        alt.datum.xval < cutoff,
        alt.value('red'), alt.value('blue')
    )
).add_params(
    cutoff
    )
```

Seems to work! I then make few more adjustments (I want the slider to work on
the y-axis and have a more reasonable default):
```{code-block} python
---
emphasize-lines: 4,5,13
---
import altair as alt
import pandas as pd

slider = alt.binding_range(min=0, max=30, step=1)
cutoff = alt.param(bind=slider, value=15)

df = pd.read_csv("mydata.csv")

alt.Chart(df).mark_point().encode(
    x='xval',
    y='yval',
    color=alt.condition(
        alt.datum.yval < cutoff,
        alt.value('red'), alt.value('blue')
    )
).add_params(
    cutoff
    )
```

My next steps would then be to change axis titles, display the month names, add
a legend, and refine from here.

**You can also browse all the steps** in a [notebook using
nbviewer](https://nbviewer.org/github/AaltoSciComp/python-for-scicomp/blob/master/resources/notebooks/plotting-exercise-2.ipynb).
:::
::::

---

:::{keypoints}
- Browse a number of example galleries to help you choose the library
  that fits best your work/style.
- Minimize manual post-processing and try to script all steps.
- CSV (comma-separated values) files are often a good format to store the data
  that we wish to plot.
- Read the data into a Pandas dataframe and then plot it with Vega-Altair
  where you connect data columns to
  [visual channels](https://altair-viz.github.io/user_guide/encodings/channels.html).
:::
